[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The position that
modern societies have taken
on psychedelics, we've
demonized these substances.
We've made them illegal.
We've subjected people
to harsh prison sentences
if they're found in
possession of psychedelics.
This is a terrible
error that is being
made in modern Western society.
We are losing contact with
our fundamental roots.
>> In the modern era,
psychedelics have been vilified
as dangerous
recreational chemicals.
>> This is your brain on drugs.
Any questions?
>> Yet, as a species, humans
haven't always held this view.
>> The Eleusinian Mysteries
in ancient Greece clearly had
a psychedelic sacrament that
was used in a beverage called
the kykeon.
>> Delving into the past, we
find psychedelics were revered
as medicines delivered
to us by the gods.
>> Studying the Hindu culture,
in very many depictions
Shiva's holding a vessel
that contains bhang,
which is a cannabis-containing
beverage that is flavored with
spices.
>> Today, with an
ever-increasing openness
to explore these substances,
will humanity not only
rediscover the profound health
benefits of psychedelics,
but also realize the true
nature of our reality as ancient
civilizations claimed?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Psychedelics, from the Greek
"psyche," meaning mind,
and "delos," meaning
make visible or reveal,
are substances that produce
changes in perception, mood,
and cognitive processes.
In the United States,
most psychedelics
fall into the Schedule
I drug category,
including dimethyltryptamine,
peyote, psilocybin, and others.
According to the United
States Controlled Substances
Act, Schedule I
means the substance
has a high potential for
abuse and has no accepted
medical use.
However, research over the past
few decades on psychedelics
has shown that substances
such as psilocybin mushrooms
have very low toxicity
and abuse potential.
Sacred psychedelic
plant medicines,
such as peyote,
ayahuasca and San Pedro
have been used in rituals
and ceremonies for hundreds,
if not thousands of years for
their mind-expanding qualities.
Some argue that early humans,
known as Homo erectus,
rapidly evolved
into Homo sapiens
by eating psilocybin mushrooms.
Proponents of the idea believe
the psychedelic mushrooms
are what was responsible
for the sudden doubling
of the human brain
200,000 years ago.
>> I think that the human
species has had a very long
relationship with mushrooms.
They evolved in
the same ecologies.
Inevitably, people would
have discovered them
and had the experiences
that they make possible.
And I think they really
did play a role in what you
might call cognitive evolution.
They taught our species
how to use language
because they created a
world where symbols, images,
and sounds were connected.
They brought meaning into
the cognitive sphere.
>> With the recent push
toward decriminalization,
the study of psychedelics in
treating mental ailments such
as addiction, PTSD, and anxiety
has seen major breakthroughs.
With mainstream scientific
studies only now showing
promising results,
the development
of conventional treatments
could take years.
This has led some sufferers of
mental illness with an aversion
to synthetic pharmaceuticals
to self-medicate
with psychedelics.
>> When I did end up winning my
Stanley Cup, I was spiritually,
and mentally, and
physically dead.
I turned to plant
medicines like CBD.
I had a hero dose of
psilocybin to really wake me up
from my anxiety, depression,
and suicidal thoughts.
And now I actively microdose
to continue introducing
the medicine into my body.
>> Microdosing is a
practice where small amounts
of psychedelics are ingested
for subtle cognitive enhancement
without hallucinations
or impairment.
>> Now, I can confidently
say that at the age of 35,
I've never felt better.
>> From 2014 to 2016, a team
of Brazilian scientists tested
the antidepressant effects of
ayahuasca in a double-blind,
randomized,
placebo-controlled trial.
The researchers observed
significant antidepressant
effects of ayahuasca
when compared to placebo.
The researchers
concluded that this study
brings new evidence
supporting the safety
and therapeutic
value of ayahuasca
dosed within an
appropriate setting
to help treat depression.
>> What ayahuasca can really
do, they say it can be like 10
years worth of
therapy in one night.
Because when you're in therapy
in the West, you're talking
and you're engaging
the intellect.
But ayahuasca makes
permeable your unconscious.
It opens the heart more.
And it becomes very visible.
Anything you've been holding in
your energetic field, anything
emotionally or you've
suppressed can come up.
And it comes up in a way that
you're not attached to it
So you can entertain it.
And then we can let go of it.
>> 2019 saw a notable boost
in psychedelic research,
with a group of private
individuals donating $17
million to create the Center for
Psychedelic and Consciousness
Research at Johns
Hopkins Medicine.
Additionally, organizations such
as MAPS and the Hefner Research
Institute encourage
peer-reviewed psychedelic
research and
therapeutic drug trials
of organic and
synthetic substances.
>> There's also been research
done by an organization called
MAPS, the Multidisciplinary
Association for Psychedelic
Studies, on the efficacy
of MDMA to treat PTSD.
We have psilocybin for
treatment-resistant depression,
end-of-life anxiety.
And then we have MDMA for PTSD.
And so what it's
looking like is the FDA
has granted breakthrough
therapy status
to both of those substances.
Basically, these substances
becoming medically available
is going to happen much
sooner than most people think.
>> If current science is finding
out that psychedelics are
beneficial, why then do
governments seek to keep them
within illegal paradigms?
>> Real genuine mystical
experiences are dangerous
to the established
power structures.
They help promote peace.
They help promote different
ways of relating to each other.
They help people to
think for themselves.
Most institutions, they
want to take that power away
from the individual.
Psychedelics, they're
dangerous in that sense,
not that the drugs are
particularly dangerous.
The drugs are remarkably
safe in the physiological,
toxicological sense.
They're dangerous because
they give you dangerous ideas.
>> Ancient people who practiced
psychedelic medicine also saw
the capability of these
substances to inspire a more
introspective look at
themselves and life as a whole.
Famous psychonaut and
lecturer Terence McKenna
explains the effect
psychedelics have on the ego.
>> The shamans have attained
a sufficient sophistication
to explicitly understand that
the vessel about chemical
transformation is the body.
And the plants lift the
imprisoning structures
of the ego.
And the ego flows
out into the world.
>> Coming out of an
experience like that,
whether or not it's
true, it feels true.
And it creates an opportunity to
reassess your entire worldview,
your spiritual, religious,
and materialistic worldview.
It brings everything
into question.
>> Some even describe
traveling to other realities,
conversing with other
worldly entities,
and gaining knowledge
beyond our earthly bounds.
>> They experience encounters
with supernatural beings,
as they construe them.
Those supernatural beings
may communicate with them
telepathically.
This is very common in
the shamanistic trance.
They may give them teachings.
And very often, they'll have
a therianthropic appearance.
They'll be part
animal and part human.
>> The metaphysical aspects
of the psychedelic effect
on the human mind do
deserve further exploration.
Yet, the health
benefits of psychedelics
remains the focus
of modern science.
It's possible we'll
see a day in the future
where psychedelics are used
as commonplace medicines.
Until then, if one feels
called to explore them,
how could psychedelics
be used in
an educated, responsible,
and appropriate way?
>> I think they will have
their therapeutic uses.
But I think the idea to just
have places where you can go
and have the experience
in a safe environment
and focus on the experience
with people there
who can help you facilitate it.
They enable you to
have a rich experience.
>> I'm not just taking
information and going off
and going to the jungle to
someone that I don't know
on a whim.
I need to understand.
And people have to
understand this.
If you're going to go
to a school let's say,
you want to check
out the school.
You want to read
some reviews on it.
You want to go meet some
people that have actually
gone to the school.
The same with the teacher, the
same with the practitioner.
Do your research.
>> This brave new world of
psychedelic usage has a bright
future, especially for those
suffering with afflictions
of PTSD, depression,
addiction, and physical trauma.
Modern applications of
psychedelic substances
can also offer metaphysical
and spiritual experiences
that very well may be life
changing for the individual.
In order to continue
our progress
into a psychedelic future,
we must first open our minds
and not immediately fear that
which we do not yet understand.
[MUSIC PLAYING]